Although the stem cell concept was introduced decades ago, to date, stem cells can only be defined functionally, not morphologically or phenotypically. Two functions define stem cells. Firstly, they are self-renewing, thus able to propagate to generate additional stem cells. Secondly they can differentiate into various progenitor cells, which commit to further maturation along a specific lineage. While stem cells can be best defined functionally, a good number of molecular markers have been used to prospectively identify various stem cell populations. Although the functional importance of many of these antigens remains unknown, their unique expression pattern and timing of expression provide a useful tool for scientists to identify as well as isolate stem cells. Embryonic stem cells (ESC), derived from the inner cell mass of pre-implantation embryos, have been recognized as the earliest stem cell population [1,2]. This pluripotent population can differentiate into all somatic tissue including germ cells. In the case of human ESC, they can differentiate into some extra-embryonic derivatives as well. Like mouse ESC, human ES cells can be maintained and propagated on mouse fibroblast feeders for extended periods in media containing basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) [3]. Gene expression of undifferentiated human ES cells has been investigated among several ES cell lines by a variety of techniques. They include comparison with databases, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, focused cDNA microarrays, and immunocytochemistry. A list of molecules comprised of known ES-specific or -highly expressed genes and candidates that can serve as markers for human ESCs and may also contribute to the "stemness" phenotype has been established [3-11]. For example, pluripotent ESC can be characterized by high level expression of Oct3/4 (POU domain, class 5, transcription factor 1, Pou5f1) and Nanog, which are a member of POU domain and homeobox transcription factors respectively. A critical amount of Oct3/4 and Nanog expression is required to sustain stem-cell pluripotency and both of these markers are downregulated as cells differentiate in vitro and in vivo [4-9]. Antibodies to Oct3/4 which cross react with human Oct 3/4 have been widely used to monitor the presence of undifferentiated ESC. No single marker however is sufficient or unique for identifying ESCs. Oct3/4 for example is expressed by germ cells and may be expressed by specific populations later in development. Likewise, Nanog has been shown to express in other tissues. We and other have noted however, that while no single marker is sufficient a constellation of positive and negative markers can in concert unambiguously allow one to define the state of ESC cultures and that surface markers in combination can be used to prospectively sort for ESC. Based on published data at the level of gene expression, we have cloned a number of candidate marker genes. We have also expressed the recombinant protein and generated a panel of monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies to these proteins. Using these antibodies we have confirmed the specificity and selectivity of these antibodies on several ESC lines and established their utility as stem cells markers. Our results confirm the expression pattern and timing of these cell markers at the protein level, whereas previous data reported at the level of gene expression.