Human embryonic stem cells (hES cells) show great promise for many novel cellular therapies due to their pluripotent nature [1]. These cells have the capacity to give rise to mature cells and tissues that arise from all three germ layers during embryonic development [2-4]. Several pluripotent hES cell lines have so far been derived from the inner cell mass of human blastocysts and can be cultured indefinitely in an undifferentiated state [5-7]. Thus, these cells provide a renewable source of pluripotent stem cells from which many types of differentiated cells could be produced for experimental and therapeutic purposes. Cell differentiation protocols currently exist for the derivation of neurons, cardiomyocytes, endothelial cells, hematopoietic progenitor cells, keratinocytes, osteoblasts, and hepatocytes to name a few [2,3,8,9]. In addition to providing for potential cellular replacement therapies, opportunities exist in programming hES cells to correct a genetic defect and/or to express a therapeutic transgene of interest. Using such approaches, many possibilities exist for treating a number of genetic and immune system disorders [1]. Many novel applications can be foreseen for hES cells in infectious disease research. AIDS is a potential disease that can benefit from exploiting hES cells for cell replacement therapy as they have the capacity to differentiate into various hematopoietic cells. HIV continues to be a major global public health problem with infections increasing at an alarming rate [10,11]. Given the present lack of effective vaccines and the ineffectiveness of drug based therapies for a complete cure, new and innovative approaches are essential. Gene therapy through intracellular immunization offers a promising alternative approach and possible supplement to current HAART therapy [12-14]. HIV mainly targets cells of the hematopoietic system, namely, T cells, macrophages, and dendritic cells [15]. As infection progresses, the immune system is rendered defenseless against other invading pathogens and succumbs to opportunistic infections. There is a great deal of progress in the area of stem cell gene therapy for AIDS [12]. A primary goal of many ongoing studies is to introduce an effective anti-HIV gene into hematopoietic stem cells [16-18]. As these cells possess the ability to self renew, they have the potential to continually produce HIV resistant T cells and macrophages in the body thus providing long term immune reconstitution. These approaches use CD34 hematopoietic stem cells for anti-HIV gene transduction via integrating viral vectors such as lentiviral vectors [16-18]. Lentiviral vectors have several advantages over conventional retroviral vectors since higher transduction efficiencies can be obtained and there is less gene silencing. The CD34 cells currently used for many therapies are primarily obtained from bone marrow or mobilized peripheral blood [1,19]. Thus, CD34 progenitor cells are an essential ingredient for HIV gene therapy. In view of the need for CD34 cells for HIV gene therapy as well as for other hematopoietic disorders, if one can produce these cells in unlimited quantities from a renewable source, it will overcome the limitations of securing large numbers of CD34 cells for therapeutic purposes. In this regard, progress has been made in deriving CD34 cells from hES cells (hES-CD34). Different methods currently exist to derive CD34 cells from hES cells with varying efficiencies [20-27]. Recent reports have indicated the capacity of hES cell derived CD34 cells to give rise to lymphoid and myeloid lineages thus paving the way for utilization of these cells for hematopoietic cell therapy [20,27-29]. For the effective utilization of hES-CD34 cells for HIV gene therapy, a number of parameters need to be examined. First, one has to demonstrate that hES-CD34 cells can give rise to macrophages and helper T cells which are the main cells that need to be protected against HIV infection. Recent evidence has shown that hES-CD34 cells can give rise to myelomonocytic cells [21]. However, thorough phenotypic or functional characterization of these cells is lacking. It is also not clear if these cells are susceptible to HIV infection. Similarly, although the hES-CD34 cells were shown to have lymphoid progenitor capacity, only B cell and natural killer (NK) cell differentiation has been examined so far [21,28]. The capacity to generate T cells remains to be evaluated. With this background, as a first step, our primary goal in these studies is to examine the capacity of hES-CD34 cells to give rise to phenotypically and functionally normal macrophages and whether such cells are susceptible to productive HIV infection. Since lentiviral vectors have been shown to successfully transduce hES cells [30-33], we further investigated the ability of transduced hES cells to differentiate into transgenic macrophages that can support HIV-1 infection. Demonstration of HIV-1 productive infection in these cells will permit future efficacy evaluations of anti-HIV genes in this system. Here we show that normal and lentiviral vector transduced hES-CD34 cells can give rise to phenotypically and functionally normal macrophages that support HIV infection thus paving the way for many novel approaches to evaluate their potential for HIV gene therapy.