Undifferentiated hESCs have been analyzed by EST scan, MPSS, SAGE and microarray [5,10,16]. The goal of these experiments including our own is to develop a low cost reliable method to assess multiple samples to generate a global database of markers and to provide a method of identifying core measures of similarities and differences across multiple laboratories. We and others have proposed three alternative methods of assessment: Quantitative RT-PCR [9,20], focused arrays [27] or a large scale array with bioinformatics tools being utilized to focus on appropriate subsets of genes [5,7,15,16,28]. Each of these methods has its advantages and disadvantages. The present results suggest that the global Illumina bead array retains the advantages of low cost per sample associated with focused arrays yet still has the strength of the global attributes of MPSS or EST scan while requiring much less RNA and turnaround time. To test this array format we examined samples from a variety of laboratories in a blinded fashion to determine whether the array was sufficiently sensitive and rapid for routine assessment. Duplicates using 100 ng of RNA were run and results obtained forty-eight hours later. The resolution was sufficient that ESC samples could be distinguished from one another and a variant karyotypically abnormal subclone could be distinguished from the parent population (correlation coefficient = 0.9043). Aliquots of the pooled ES and pooled EB samples, which we had prepared for MPSS, were included in this run to compare these two methods directly. The current analysis confirms that comparison across platforms is difficult and that only positive results can be treated with any reliability. The absence of expression cannot be readily interpreted. In particular, genes expressed at low levels (greater than 70% of all genes detected) should not be assessed in cross platform comparisons. The limited concordance at low levels raises a question as to how many genes are actually expressed by any one cell line and whether the cutoff of 3 tpm used for MPSS or 100 intensity units for bead arrays is a reasonable cutoff. We used 100 units for our analysis and we would suggest that readers exercise similar caution. Nevertheless even at this higher cutoff the arrays were remarkably sensitive and allowed us to readily distinguish between samples including cells grown in the same laboratory. The basis of the sensitivity could be attributed to a limited set of genes and those genes could be identified for future use. For example BG01V, while much more similar to BG01 than to any other cell type, could still be distinguished from a biological replicate of BG01 by the expression of a particular subset of differentiation markers (Figure 6). EC cells such as NTera2 could be distinguished from hESCs by the expression of germ cell markers and the presence of a partially inactivated TGFβ (BMP) signaling pathway (Figure 6). Distinguishing ESCs from EBs was relatively straightforward. We have confirmed the utility of previously identified markers for use in this platform as well as identified an additional set of markers that can serve as biomarkers to distinguish between the hESC and EB states. A subset of these markers have been used to develop a qPCR assay that shows such a high sensitivity that changes in cell behavior can be detected after as little as twenty-four hours and the development of EBs can be reliably staged [10,20]. During the identification of ES and EB specific markers, we have noticed that some known hESC markers, such as Nanog, was not detected in all populations of hESCs that were included in this analysis. Several ESC-specific gene, including Lin41, Sox2 and FoxD3, were not detected in the array either (Table 3). We believe that the problem with Lin 41, Sox2 and FoxD3 is a technical one as we were able to confirm expression using alternate methods. We are in progress of redesigning appropriate probes for these genes. In the case of the gene Nanog, there are several pseudo genes in the genome for Nanog and it has been a major technical challenge designing primers or probes that are specific and sensitive. We believe that a partial explanation for the variability in Nanog expression is due to the lack of sensitivity to this gene. However, immunocytochemistry while not strictly quantitative shows similar variability when used to assess Nanog expression in different cell lines [9,27,28]. This large comparison between samples allowed us to identify markers that distinguish human feeder cells from hESC. While we have listed 19 potential markers (Figure 3) and identified several hundred potential markers as shown in Additional file 5, we suggest that as few as 3–4 genes may be sufficient. Previously we found that as few as four were satisfactory to distinguish between hESCs and hEBs, which are two much more closely related samples [9]. In this study we have confirmed by qPCR the differential expression of four genes, THBS1, MMP3, TNFRSF11B and KRTH4, to separate human fibroblast feeders and hESCs (Figure 3). Several markers such as MMP3 and TNFRSF11B have commercially available antibodies (R&D systems) that may be used to further confirm contamination of feeder cells by immunocytochemistry. Efforts to identify other useful antibodies based on these results continue [29]. While we have focused on the immediate utility of the Illumina array platform, it is important to remember that this array provides a global snapshot of cell state and the data obtained can be readily compared in order to determine key signaling pathways. The ability to compare multiple samples in one run enhances data selectivity and reliability. To make such analysis more readily available, we utilized several software tools including the software package available through Illumina. The BeadStudio software provided with the BeadLab and BeadStudio genetic analysis systems for use with the bead array datasets provides a useful set of analytical and presentation tools that allow straightforward comparisons, which are sufficient for average users. For detailed analysis we recommend using more specific commercial tools or software packages developed by NCBI.