Recent technological advances have led to DNA microarrays which contain over hundred thousand of spots of DNA material, reaching a truly genomic scale. Highly specialized DNA microarrays of smaller scale (e.g. the NeuroStem Chip) still have an important role in the directed studies in particular fields. Since they are significantly less expensive, compared to many recognized large-scale platforms (e.g. Affymetrix Human Genome platforms), they have a clear advantage in routine work involving samples from, e.g., multiple cell culture conditions. While there is a risk that one will miss out on changes in genes previously not believed to be relevant to neural differentiation, the restricted number of genes in the NeuroStem Chip also simplifies analysis and adds power. NeuroStem Chip is comparable to other stem cell-related focused microarray platforms in regards to manufacturing costs and technical simplicity of the recommended hybridization protocols. At the same time, it currently implies an advantage in both the scale and the spectrum of pre-selected, specific gene targets assayed. Some suggested areas of application for NeuroStem microarray platform could be the following: (i) characterization of the expression of established, pre-selected gene targets in human stem cell (hSC) lines, including newly derived ones, (ii) longitudinal quality control for maintained hSC populations, (iii) following gene expression changes during differentiation under defined cell culture conditions, and (iv) confirming the success of differentiation into specific neuronal subtypes. In addition, the NeuroStem Chip can be used to characterize gene changes in intracerebral grafts of human cells, even when they are transplanted into experimental animals. We specifically wish to stress that we are about to make the NeuroStem Chip available at a non-profit cost to the research community. We believe it has the potential to become an important screening tool in the expanding field of hSC studies in application to neurological/neurodegenerative disorders.