Mapping the location of DNaseI-hypersensitive sites (DHSs) remains central to developing our understanding of transcriptional regulation. Elements with a range of transcriptional regulatory functions have been identified initially as DHSs. These include transcriptional enhancers (1,2) and repressors (3,4) as well as chromatin insulators and barrier elements (5,6). A number of techniques have been published recently that permit the mapping of DHSs without the need for Southern blotting (7–13). These include high-throughput sequencing of cloned DNA libraries derived from DNaseI-digested chromatin (8,9), and a number of different approaches that use genomic tiling path arrays to map DHSs (7,11,13). While these approaches have the advantage of covering large genomic regions with a limited number of experiments, they are inherently costly and less applicable to the rapid DHS mapping of specific genomic sites in a range of cell types. An alternative approach that does permit the targeted semi-quantitative DHS mapping of specific loci has used quantitative real-time PCR to map sites from digested DNA (10). This technique depends on the quantification of relative loss of PCR signal observed when PCR primers amplify across regions of digested DNA compared with amplification of undigested DNA. This approach has been reported as showing good sensitivity, but a limitation is the large number of PCR reactions required to quantify the calculated loss of signal with significant certainty. In this article, we present an alternative method to identify DHS using real-time PCR by adapting the protocol we have used to map DHS using genomic tiling path arrays (11). We have previously demonstrated the high sensitivity and specificity of the basic protocol with regard to identifying DHS across large genomic regions (11). Here, we detail the laboratory protocol that permits the rapid comparative mapping of known and candidate DHS between different cell types using real-time PCR. As examples, we include comparative DHS mapping of regulatory elements located across the extended TAL1 (T-cell acute lymphocytic leukaemia-1, also known as SCL (stem cell leukaemia)) locus in human embryonic stem (hES) cells and the leukaemia cell line K562.