The human central nervous system is composed of thousands of neuronal subtypes originating from neural stem cells (NSCs) that migrate from the developing neural tube. Such neuronal complexity is generated by a vast repertoire of molecular, genetic, and epigenetic mechanisms, such as the active retrotransposition of transposable elements [1], alternative promoter usage, alternative RNA splicing (AS), alternative polyadenylation, RNA editing, post-translational modifications, and epigenetic modulation [2]. Understanding the processes that generate neuronal diversity is key to gaining insights into neuronal development and paving new avenues for biomedical research. Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are pluripotent cells that propagate perpetually in culture as undifferentiated cells and can be induced to differentiate into a multitude of cell types both in vitro and in vivo [3]. As hESCs can theoretically generate all cell types that make up an organism, they serve as an important model for understanding early human embryonic development. In addition, the hESCs are a nearly infinite source for generating specialized cells such as neurons and glia for potential therapeutic purposes [4,5]. In recent years, methods have been introduced to induce hESCs to differentiate into neural progenitors (NPs) [6,7] and neuronal and glial subtypes [8–12]. The therapeutic interest in understanding the molecular basis of pluripotency and differentiation has led to many studies comparing transcriptional profiles in different hESC lines and the study of expression changes during the differentiation of hESCs to various lineages [13–17]. NSCs and progenitor cells (NPs) are present throughout development and persist into adulthood [18–20]. They are critical for both basic research and developing approaches to treat neurological disorders, such as Parkinson disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and stroke or head injuries [21,22]. NSCs and NPCs can be isolated from human fetal brain tissue [23–26], as well as from several regions of the adult human brain, such as the cortex, hippocampus, and the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the lateral ventricles [26–35]. Several studies have explored expression patterns of NPCs. For example, Wright et al. identified “expressed” and “not expressed” genes in NPCs isolated from the human embryonic cortex [24]; Cai et al. used the massively parallel signature sequencing profiling (MPSS) technique to analyze expression of fetal NPCs in comparison to hESCs and astrocyte precursors [27]; Maisel et al. used Affymetrix Gene Chip arrays to compare adult and fetal NPCs propagated in neurospheres [35]. However, as with hESCs, the focus thus far has been primarily on transcriptional differences, which ignores differential RNA processing such as AS, polyadenylation, degradation, or promoter usage. AS is frequently used to regulate gene expression and to generate tissue-specific mRNA and protein isoforms [36–39]. Recent studies using splicing-sensitive microarrays suggested that up to 75% of human genes undergo AS, where multiple isoforms are derived from the same genetic loci [40]. This functional complexity underscores the challenge and importance of elucidating AS regulation. AS appears to play a dominant role in regulating neuronal gene expression and function [41,42]. Examples of splicing regulators that are enriched and function specifically in neuronal cells include the brain-specific splicing factor Nova [43,44] and neural-specific polypyrimidine tract binding protein (nPTB), which antagonizes its paralogous PTB to regulate exon exclusion in neuronal cells [45–47]. Finally, an early report estimating that 15% of point mutations disrupt splicing underscores the importance of splicing in human disease [48]. Indeed, the disruption of specific AS events has been implicated in several human genetic diseases, such as frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism, Frasier syndrome, and atypical cystic fibrosis [49]. While insights into the regulation of AS have come predominantly from the molecular dissection of individual genes [36,49], it is becoming clear that molecular rules can be identified from large-scale studies of both constitutive splicing and AS [40]. Most systematic global analyses on AS have focused on comparisons across differentiated human tissues [50–52]. Only one study, utilizing expressed sequence tag (EST) collections from stem cells, has attempted to find AS differences between embryonic and hematopoietic stem cells [53]. However, utilizing ESTs to identify AS has intrinsic problems, as ESTs tend to be biased for the 3′ ends of genes, and full coverage of the genome by ESTs is severely limited by sequencing costs. The commercial availability of Affymetrix exon arrays provides an alternative approach to interrogate the expression of every known and predicted exon in the human genome. The Affymetrix GeneChip Human Exon 1.0 ST array contains ∼5.4 million features used to interrogate ∼1 million exon clusters (collections of overlapping) of known and predicted exons with more than 1.4 million probesets, with an average of four probes per exon. Our goal was to identify and characterize AS events that distinguish pluripotent hESCs from multipotent NPs, paving the way for future candidate gene approaches to study the impact of AS in hESCs and NPs. However, as different hESC lines were established under different culture conditions from embryos with unique genetic backgrounds, we expected that hESCs and their derived NPs might have distinct epigenetic and molecular signatures [54]. As both common and cell-line specific alternatively spliced exons are likely to be important in regenerative research, in our study two separate hESC lines were used, with independent protocols for differentiating the hESCs into NPs positive for Sox1, an early neuroectodermal marker. As an endogenously occurring population of NPs, human central nervous system stem cells grown as neurospheres (hCNS-SCns) were utilized as a natural benchmark for derived NPs. We developed an approach called REAP (Regression-based Exon Array Protocol), which is based on robust regression that analyzed signal estimates from Affymetrix exon array data to identify AS exons. Experimental validation revealed alternative exons that distinguish hESCs from NPs; some of them also distinguish hESCs from a variety of differentiated tissues. A comparison of REAP-predicted alternative events with independent methods, such as using publicly available transcripts (ESTs and mRNAs) and computational predictions based on genomic sequence information alone [55], showed a strong concordance of REAP-identified AS exons with AS events identified from these orthogonal methods. Finally, using analysis of the sequences flanking REAP-identified alternative exons, we were able to discover known and novel cis-regulatory elements that potentially regulate these AS events.