The ability of ESCs to generate all three embryonic germ layers has raised the exciting possibility that hESCs may become an unlimited source of cells for transplantation therapies involving organs or tissues such as the liver, pancreas, blood, and nervous system, and become tools to explore the molecular mechanisms of human development. Despite such interests, relatively little is understood about the molecular mechanisms defining their pluripotency and the molecular changes important for hESCs to differentiate into specific cell types. To understand these events, protocols are still being developed to differentiate ESCs into a variety of lineages. Of particular biomedical interest is in the capacity of hESCs to be differentiated into a self-renewing population of NPs that can be then further coaxed into a variety of neuronal subtypes, such as dopaminergic neurons that are important in the treatment of Parkinson disease or cholinergic neurons for ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis). While many microarray studies have explored molecular differences between hESCs and derived NPs, most, if not all, have focused on transcriptional changes. These studies have largely ignored intermediate RNA processing events prior to and during translation. In recent years, AS has gained momentum as being important in development, apoptosis, and cancer. REAP, a regression-based method for analyzing exon array data was introduced, and was applied to discover AS events in hESCs, their derived NPs, and in hCNS-SCns. REAP was based on the assumptions that most exons in the gene of interest and in the genome are constitutively spliced and that outliers in a linear pairwise comparison of the signal estimates for probesets in a gene could be detected using a robust regression-based approach. REAP predictions were found to correlate well with transcript-based methods for identifying alternative exons, which interestingly suggested that current databases of transcript information, albeit not specifically enriched for hESC or NPs, in aggregate are nevertheless predictive of AS events in hESC and NP. In addition, REAP[+] exons were also enriched for ACEScan-predicted evolutionarily conserved exons [55]. As ACEScan utilized a different set of information from REAP, the agreement between both algorithms served to further validate the predicted alternative exons. Additional studies in mouse ESCs and neural derivatives will be necessary to determine if these AS events are indeed preserved in these analogous and orthologous cell types. Our finding that only a minority of AS events was common between various hESC to NP comparisons is intriguing. A possible explanation is that the cell lines were not only genetically different, but were also exposed to different isolation and culture conditions. In addition, the different differentiation protocols established as optimal for generating Nestin and Sox1 positive neural precursors may lead to vastly different molecular changes. It is likely that post-transcriptional changes such as AS may be more variable despite the cells being at acknowledged “end-points” defined by a limited set of immunohistochemical markers. Our results are consistent with a recent study that showed that while two well-established hESC lines differentiate into functional neurons, the two lines exhibited distinct differentiation potentials, suggesting that some preprogramming had occurred [76]. In particular, microRNA profiling revealed significant expression differences between the two hESC lines, suggesting that microRNAs, known post-transcriptional regulators, may sway the differentiation properties of the cell lines [76]. We postulated that AS events may serve also to bias the differentiation spectrum of the cells, an important avenue for future work. Experimental validation of REAP[+] exons suggested a high specificity at the expense of relatively moderate sensitivity. We believe that the high FP rates may arise from cross-hybridization effects that remained unaccounted for. However, our specificity of 77% at the cutoff of two significant outliers per probeset allowed us to estimate that at least 1,336 of 1,737 REAP[+] exons were true AS events that changed during neuronal differentiation of hESC cells, and/or were different between endogeneous NPs and hESC. On average, 7% of all human exons have been estimated by transcript data to undergo AS; thus REAP's validation rate of 60% at the cutoff of two is 73-fold (60/7) higher than expected. In addition, we validated nine novel AS events that distinguish hESCs and NPs. Consistent with our computational results, we observed that the AS patterns in hCNS-SCns were not always similar to those of the derived NPs. It was important to point out that while transcriptional expression of these genes did not distinguish these cells from one another, in several instances the REAP-predicted AS event was able to separate derived NPs and hCNS-SCns. A notable exception was the alternative exon in the SLK gene, encoding a serine/threonine kinase protein, which was commonly included in both hESCs, i.e., the exon-excluded isoform was not present in hESCs compared to NPs, as well as in a variety of differentiated tissues. Closer inspection of the REAP[+]-validated AS exon in the SLK gene revealed strong conservation in the intronic region flanking the exon, a hallmark feature of evolutionarily conserved AS exons [55,77,78]. A study analyzing the expression patterns of the SLK gene suggested a potential functional role during embryonic development and in the adult central nervous system [79]; however, to our knowledge, our identification of the SLK alternative exon is the first report of a hESC-biased AS pattern during neuronal differentiation and across a myriad of differentiated tissues. In agreement, GO analysis suggested that genes containing REAP[+] exons were enriched in serine/threonine kinase activity, of which SLK is a family member. Future work will be required to study the impact of AS in these genes in hESCs and NPs. We predict it is unlikely that the alternative exon in the SLK gene is the only case common across hESC and different from differentiated tissues, but further studies will be necessary to identify other hESC-specific exons. REAP[+] exons were underrepresented in genes that were differentially transcriptionally regulated in hESCs and NPs. Our results act as a reminder that focusing only on genes that are differentially expressed will overlook RNA processing events that may be biologically relevant to the system of interest. Finally, we identified potential cis-regulatory intronic elements conserved and enriched proximal to the REAP[+] exons. In particular, the FOX1/2 binding site, GCUAG, was conserved and enriched in the flanking introns of a subset of REAP[+] exons. Further studies will be required to explore the importance of FOX1 family members in early neuronal differentiation. In conclusion, our introduction of REAP and its application to identifying AS events has revealed new and unanticipated insights into hESC biology and their transition to NP cells. Collectively, these exons represent a set of molecular changes that are likely to be important for studying human neural differentiation with applications in neuronal regenerative medicine.